a German warship has set sail for the
Red Sea to join an international mission
to secure shipping in the region this
comes after European Union member states
gave their preliminary approval to uh
European involvement uh in the mission
which is aimed at eliminating the threat
posed by Hy Rebels the group has been
launching rocket and drone attacks in
the Red Sea and the Gulf of
Aiden the hooti say they fire at ships
in solidarity with Palestinians in Gaza
the hooti rocket and drone attacks are
disrupting one of the world's busiest
cargo routes through the Red Sea and the
Gulf of Aiden raising worries of damage
to the world
economy us and UK warships have been
firing back with attacks on hooy
positions trying to destroy their
ability to threaten shipping in the
area now Germany aims to contribute to
the mission to help secure the Red Sea
sending this frigate the hessen with
over 200 crew on board the hessen is
equipped with Advanced anti-aircraft and
anti-missile systems and will help in
aerial
defense the US the UK France and Italy
already have warships in the
region the hessen must make its way from
all the way up here the German port of
vhms halfen on the North Sea to join
them so far all attacks on hooti
Military sites have been carried out by
the US and UK okay the EU ships are
meant to intercept attacks but not take
part in the assaults on hooty positions
on
land but even as the other warships in
the area wait for the hessen the German
government still needs an official
mandate to participate in the mission
both the European Union and Germany's
Parliament must give their
approval here to guide us through this
story are Simon young in Berlin and Luci
Schon in Brussels welcome both let's
start with you uh Lucia what is the eu's
stated objection uh sorry objective of
this uh
Mission yeah in one word it is to
protect Merchant vessels or trade ships
um that want to cross the Red Sea uh you
can already see by the name that they're
choosing for this Mission it is aspis
which means shield in Greek um that the
the goal is to protect these ships um
the the decision right now um that has
been taken today is a first step it is
important to to know that there is a
second step following which will be a
vote um by the foreign Ministers of the
European Union which is expected to be
uh on the 19th of February and only then
the mission will be officially launched
and Simon young why is Germany taking
part well I think one of the key things
is because of the effects of the attacks
by houthis are on German uh business
when you think that 90% of globally
traded goods go by sea and some of the
big shipping firms are now avoiding uh
the Red Sea route through sez which is
the quickest way uh between Asia and
Europe they're having to go around
Africa instead the German uh Chambers of
Commerce and Industry are warning that
that means empty warehouses it means
longer delivery times and it means
ultimately higher prices and it's having
an effect already on some German
businesses one example uh Tesla which
has already had to wind down uh
production at its German manufacturing
plants so it could uh this is already
having an effect and it could get worse
so Lucia Walton Simon makes a point that
this uh this action in the the Red Sea
having economic impacts around the world
yet all 27 EU member states don't appear
to to be on
board yeah we have heard from the high
representative Joseph Burell that not
all 27 member states are on board um or
not willing to participate more to say
but that he's not expecting them to
block the decision so there's a
difference in that what you have to also
take into consideration there is that um
you need a certain equipment to be part
of this Mission because you need a
frigate you need um naval military
assets and not every country in the
European Union itself is a naval has a
marine is a naval power so to say there
are quite some countries which are
landlocked so that might be part of the
explanation why not everyone there is on
board we have um heard from some
countries that they're interested in
joining uh for example Italy but also
France Germany of course so you have to
see that a bit in that context that not
everyone has these powers and I think
that gives it away um why why the member
states are taking their decisions but as
I have said we will have to also wait a
bit longer to really see um wait for the
19th of February to see um if the vote
passes and then also at a later stage
the member states will really make their
pledges and say um what they're going to
contribute to the rsy mission and it is
on a voluntary
base okay uh Lucia Shulton in Brussels
uh Simon young in Berlin thank you
both